next former senator george mcgovern
recounts the life of President Abraham
Lincoln he talks about Lincoln's
political career focusing on his
legislative decisions throughout the
course of the Civil War senator McGovern
was introduced by author and critic for
badal is with some joy i present to you
senator McGovern wise isn't even but
stuck with a different set of cards so
he and I sit here and look on your
habitation and consider this how
Dickens's was from 1972 when all things
seem possible convincing me that all
things one should we must gather
and no that's socialism the country
[Applause]
[Music]
well over the years I've had the
privilege of being introduced many many
of important people but this is the
first time that I can recall being
introduced by a man who got a standing
ovation just for walking into the Nixon
Library and I'm very grateful to Gore
for that long regarded him as our
leading man of letters thanks to all of
you for coming out on a weekday for this
occasion I've been on a book tour of
california for the last few days and
while we're said to be in a deep
recession today every place we've gone
in promoting this book on Abraham
Lincoln we've had a sellout so I'm very
grateful
[Music]
[Applause]
that includes the first night at book
passage in corte madera where we sold
over 200 books it includes redondo beach
where we had another sellout includes
Chapman University where we were this
afternoon I've discovered that this
Lincoln McGovern take it is very very
popular but it wasn't till tonight when
we added Richard Nixon and Gorby doll
that we had 700 people come out so I'm
very grateful for that and thanks so
much for coming out this little book
that i have written on Abraham Lincoln
is part of the presidential series
published by x books a division of henry
hold in which they propose to have an
author right on the presidencies of
every president beginning with george
washington i was in a restaurant in new
york city about three years ago and a
lifetime friend of mine Arthur
Schlesinger spotted me and I saw him
working his way over to my table and he
said George I want you to do me a favor
I'm the editor-in-chief of the series of
books on the presidencies of all of them
since we're going to have a different
author for each president and I want you
to do one of these books I begged off on
the grounds that i had just started
working with the former Senator Robert
dole on a project that i think is very
important which is aimed at convincing
the united nations with the united
states in the lead to provide a good
nutritious school lunch every day for
every hungry school child around the
world
[Music]
[Applause]
I have been interested in this problem
of human hunger all of my public life
many people associated me with my
opposition to the war and Vietnam and
that was a major concern of mine for
about 10 years but the recurring issue
that I've been involved in from the
beginning was reducing the amount of
hunger in the world I have always
enjoyed eating but I was at a lovely
restaurant in Los Angeles last night
with my friend Patricia Kelly who's here
this evening and who has been in charge
of my book promotion tour and I just
thought what a wonderful delightful
experience that was to be in that lovely
restaurant and have this with delicious
mail but it also occurred to me that I
would have enjoyed it even more if I
knew that everybody else could have an
experience like that at some time in
their life unfortunately that's not
going to happen as matters now lapsed
and so I gave Arthur that excuse for not
doing this book he said now listen
George you've been telling me for 30
years that northwestern university where
you went is better than Harvard where I
went now now's the time to either put up
or shut up
anyway after about an hour I said well I
will do one of those books if I can get
Abraham Lincoln I've always thought he
was our greatest president
notwithstanding the fact that he's the
founder of the Republican Party but
which by the way was the party of my
mother and father it's interesting that
Bob Dole and I had teamed up on this
effort to feed hungry children he grew
up in a democratic family strong strong
New Deal Democrats I grew up in a strong
Republican Party and we both seem to
have crossed our parents but I asked
both up for Lincoln and Arthur said well
the trouble with that is that we've
already had a request the Lincoln
President Bill Clinton and he said this
may come as a surprise to you but some
people think that actually being elected
president is more impressive than just
running for it anyway I said well if he
changes his mind let me know a year went
by and I get a call about midnight it's
Arthur and then he said guess what Bill
Clinton has just told us she can't do
the Lincoln book so that's why I'm here
and authorization
[Applause]
[Music]
it's interesting about Lincoln Gore once
wrote a fascinating historical novel
about Lincoln I think it's one of the
better things that that Gore has have
written but he will verify what I'm
about to tell you that over six thousand
books have been written about Lincoln
more than all the other presidents
combined I think one reason for that is
that people admire the enormous
handicaps that Lincoln had to overcome
to achieve the status historians have
given Emma's are our greatest president
woman one of those handicaps was the
unbelievable limitation on his formal
education one year of Education but
during that time he learned to read and
he learned to write and he never stopped
reading reading reading reading all of
his life and enlarging his wisdom
enlarging his insights into human beings
and into human the history and he
learned the right there is a brilliant
new book out called Lincoln's sword and
Lincoln sword in that author's book is
his capacity to write I I don't know
whether gore would agree with me on this
but I think he was the best writer ever
to sit in the White House he didn't have
ghost writers but he studied literature
he studied history he studied the King
James version of the Bible he studied
Shakespeare and he became probably the
greatest writer ever deserved in the
White House I think one of the reasons
for Lincoln's fame are those great
speeches and letters that he wrote he's
been gone now for a long time but those
speeches are still readily available to
it so that's one achievement that has
always impressed me another another
great handicap that Lincoln had was what
today we would call clinical depression
it's a widespread malady among our
fellow citizens we have a daughter who
suffered from clinical depression from
teenage on she medicated it with alcohol
she was in great spells of despondency
and the one thing that would bring her
out of it was a half a bottle of vodka
and she was then the life of the party
but it eventually took her life as it
does divides us so many of our fellow
citizens but I learned something about
depression during that period it can
thank you and two spells of despondency
that are indescribable it can take your
appetite it can rob you of your zest for
life you go to bed at night hoping you
might not wake up in the morning Lincoln
though talked about suicide repeatedly
in his life he told one of his state
senators
in the legislature at Springfield
Illinois that he had quit carrying a
knife for fear he would slit his wrist
or his throat some day it's not clear
what causes depression and any of us or
in Lincoln but there were various things
that seemed to contribute to it the
death of n Rutledge whom some historians
say was his first real love I don't know
how they knew that but in any event that
was the birdie sometimes it might be the
bankruptcy of a business and he went
through that twice with small stores
that he attempted to run that each time
bankrupted him it it might have been the
loss of an election I know a little bit
about about that it's more fun to win
than than it is to lose it might be bad
weather doctors today say it's a
chemical deficiency might had some
hereditary aspects to it but in any
event Lincoln had to grapple with that
miserable affliction through much of his
life he was in his office one day during
the Civil War and this is another
paradox in his life he hated war and
then had to preside over four years of
it one day when a group of women were
waiting to see him they heard him
laughing in his office every two or
three men there in the guffaws were
coming out into the reception area so
when the women got in the chair person
said that we're pleased to meet you
mr. president and we thank you for your
time but we are disturbed that you would
be laughing in the midst of this
terrible war that's killing young
Americans both north and south lincoln
said ma'am I can appreciate your concern
over that I understand that but if I
could not occasionally laughs my heart
would break in this terrible scourge
that is upon the land and the women
accepted that but I think it's I think
it's a great tribute to Lincoln that he
had this miserable attack of spa
despondency time after time without any
medication of the kind that we have
today no prozac no paxil no lithium no
electric shock therapy he took that
illness on the loan so i believe the
lincoln deserves to be considered as an
admirable figure not only because he
overcame the limitation of education but
also because he took on this terrible
monster of the depression that afflicted
him so much of his life lincoln thought
that his greatest achievement was the
Emancipation Proclamation respectfully I
would beg to disagree the Emancipation
Proclamation was a seminal declaration
in our history and something of great
importance although it didn't freeze
Wade's anywhere except in the
11 states of the Confederacy where
Lincoln was really powerless to enforce
it but it was the beginning of the
emancipation of the slaves and in that
sense it was important but I think the
most important achievement of Lincoln is
that he preserved the Union when we sing
my country tis of thee or the
star-spangled banner or god bless
america we're manifesting our pride in
the United States of America and that's
what Lincoln preserved was the United
States of America which was a sizable
achievement he had the capacity I think
of a clever shrewd politician but also
he had the visionary capabilities of a
statesman and both of those things were
essential in his makeup you don't land
in the White House without some
knowledge of politics and the ability to
work within the political process of
this country and yet it's not really
worth getting to the White House if you
don't have more than political skills
and political Talent Lincoln also had a
vision for this country he admired
Jefferson's Declaration of Independence
above all other documents we hold these
truths to be self-evident that all men
are created equal endowed by their
creator with certain inalienable rights
and among these are life liberty and the
food of happiness Lincoln said one day
that he never had a worthwhile political
thought that did not derive from the
Declaration of Independence he wasn't
perfect in the White House he during the
pressures of the Civil War he lifted the
writ of habeas corpus which is one of
our most priceless legal guarantees in
this country the right to know why we're
being arrested why were in jail and to
come before a magistrate to be told what
the charges are and whether or not
they're valid for holding us in prison
that's one of the things that I objected
to about sending these young men that
scooped off the streets of Baghdad down
to the guantanamo base and
[Music]
[Applause]
they neither knew why they were being
held nor did they have any
recommendation from a judge as to
whether or not they should be held and
that's that's too bad but we can't
condemn that kind of behavior on the
part of President Bush jr. and then say
it's okay for Lincoln to lift the grip
of a pious corpus it's not okay and it's
one failure on the part of his
administration Lincoln also closed down
some of the newspapers that were
excessively critical of his
administration I've often wished in
politics I had that power but we don't
have that power we don't have it we have
to stand up and take it what an editor
tells us we're off base and so that was
another mistake on Lincoln's part but by
and large he did so many things that
strengthened this country and preserved
this country that we have to see the
whole picture some some biographers have
overlooked some of the important things
that happened in the Lincoln
administration that had nothing to do
with the Civil War the Homestead Act
that's one of the most important tax in
American history because it established
the pattern of family farming that
became the cornerstone of agriculture in
this country 160 acres would go to any
American who would live on that slice of
the public lands
and pharma for five years at the end of
the five years the government gave you
that land and that was about the size of
family farms in this country for a
hundred years they've gotten bigger now
but one of the reasons American
agriculture has been the envy of the
world is that we've had these family
farm size structures they possess a
they've gotten bigger now but still the
principle of family farming continues
what is the family farm it's one that's
about the size that a family can operate
without hiring large numbers of
industrial workers that came in the
Lincoln administration in 1862 right in
the heart of the Civil War the
land-grant College Act the morel act as
it was more correctly known as provided
for the federal government to underrate
land-grant colleges in all of the states
so we have Penn State we have I Allah
state in California we have the
agricultural and mechanical science
university there of tremendous
importance to the development the United
States a third thing they created the
United States Department of Agriculture
again right in the middle of the Civil
War and then not to be outdone they
built the Transcontinental railway
during the Civil War stretching from
Omaha Nebraska all the way to say
commander lengthen loved railways and he
became a very successful attorney the
railroads but here was this great
structured the Transcontinental Railroad
if I had my way we would once again
today begin building the fastest the
cleanest the safest the most efficient
railway network in the world if you if
you take those for actions that I've
just mentioned that's a pretty good
record for any administration and they
shouldn't be forgotten well these are
just a few of my thoughts on Abraham
Lincoln we have this great Mount
Rushmore monument out in South Dakota
with before faces carved on the side of
the mountain Washington on one end
Linkin on the other and Thomas Jefferson
and theodore roosevelt in the mid
section if it's a great inspiration to
see it I think Lincoln belongs on that
monument is one of our great president
I'm going to take a few questions from
the floor and then after we do that I
will sign books I hoped for a long time
I want to I want to explain them
I want to explain to you that I don't
keep any of the money I get to the books
I've written it isn't that I don't need
the money but I have that I have some
foundation work that involved including
foundation on alcoholism and that's
where the any of the royalties that i
receive go my books don't sell like
doors and that's why he's a lot richard
and then that i am but i want to thank
you gore for being with us tonight you
honor us with you
okay I'll take your questions and since
I don't get to the Nexen presidential
library too often you can ask questions
on anything you want to raise time
somebody had a hand up over over here
them okay thank you just stand up and
speak loudly and I think they'll then oh
maybe just go away here we are here's
the microphone over here saying I saw a
leather cannon in 1960 recording the
show my question is how do you do would
you have one with him for president or
vice-president in other words had
Senator Robert Kennedy David Oh would
you have run with him interviewing with
he had asked me I certainly would ya I
certainly would have thought about it
yeah I you know I think this Kennedy
family is one of the most remarkable
families in the history of American
politics that doesn't mean I think they
were perfect they certainly wouldn't
claim that for themselves but losing a
ted kennedy of today actually yesterday
again made me sad to reflect on these
brothers in the Kennedy clan each one of
them had certain talents I think Ted was
the best senator of the three partly
because the other two Robert Kennedy and
John Kennedy had their eye on the White
House and Ted at least after the tragedy
at Chappaquiddick had his eye on being
the best senator he could possibly be in
I think he achieved that he was a great
senator but with regard to your question
that no one of three ever asked me to
run with him but if they had yet I would
have thought about it then by the way I
don't claim to be the world's leading
expert on how to pick a vice president
answer my question partially I was just
wondering if from your time in the
Senate if you had any particular
individual memories of tennis because
it's such an odd island that you're here
today in his place on and that passed
away yesterday so I guess I could resist
asking what seems like a very overly
obvious question but is there any
particular bill or time or anything good
or bad or just interesting you know one
thing yeah I mentioned a couple of
things that I admired about Ted Kennedy
number one after that tragedy at
Chappaquiddick I think many people would
have just quit politics after that Ted
certainly didn't need the job any one of
those Kennedy brothers could have been a
full-time what playboy if they had
wanted the day instead of be the working
as hard as they did in public service
but I saw Ted in his office within two
or three days of that Chappaquiddick
tragedy seven o'clock in the morning I
saw him there at seven o'clock night and
that was his pattern to get up and work
as hard as he could
that's what he did for 47 years he and i
arrived in the Senate the same day in
1962 and I said in the back row the
Senate with head for a number of years
freshman senators always started in the
back row he and I chose not to move up
even though senior he would it permitted
that I come from South Dakota were wild
bill hickok got shot in the back saying
show you there's some advantage but
being in the back row when no one can
get behind you but gaylord nelson of
wisconsin also said stayed in the back
when I said doing one day you know
Gaylord one problem with the seats back
here is sometimes hard to hear the
discussion on the Senate floor he says
that's what makes it the best seat in
the house well to be more serious about
this Ted was a great senator and he
hardly missed a day in his office I
think that takes a certain amount of
guts to survive an embarrassing incident
of that kind as he did and yet keep
working the other thing I admired about
him on a personal basis if any senator
had a loss a child got in trouble spouse
had died any other setback he was the
first person to call when our daughter
Terry died it was a really tragic thing
for owner and made and he was there at
nine o'clock the next morning with his
wife and to express sympathy he was in
person I suppose the repeated tragedies
and his own family had something to do
with that but he was a very thoughtful
person I thought a lot of them as a
human bein service and her scholarship
and the court to reading your book and
thank you again for your dedication to
truth and dignity and your humility like
[Applause]
my question goes back to Abraham Lincoln
and his brief tenure in the House of
Representatives he stood up and
criticizing them the award between
United States and innovation of Mexico
how do you compare your own outcry
against the word that honey compared
with your political costs that he
suffers with your yes well there is a
parallel there Lincoln mom as you say
had only one term in the House of
Representatives is not entirely clear
that he didn't go back to the house
because of his opposition to the war in
Mexico but certainly that was a
hazardous position to take it's always
hazardous to oppose a war once the bands
began to play and the flags ways and to
criticize the war in progress is
dangerous politically I knew that during
all those days when I was opposed to the
war in Vietnam in fact I thought I would
not survive beyond one term as it turns
out by the time I came up to reelection
most of my constituents were beginning
to question the war and so I I survived
but it is the hazardous position at the
end I do wish that more senators and
congressmen would take a look at our
growing military involvement in
Afghanistan
[Music]
I think that's a really really how shall
I say it an unwise military adventure I
am for Barack Obama everybody knows I'm
the Democrat I have a high regard I
think he's a talented articulate capable
man but i think he was wrong to commend
to the office and almost immediately
send another twenty one thousand young
Americans into Afghanistan and you know
from history that it will only be a few
months when the Joint Chiefs are asking
for another 25 another 30,000 I don't
want us to see I don't want to see us go
down that's what we slope as we did in
Vietnam and in Iraq another ill-advised
war that we never should've added you
know
[Music]
there there are many reasons why I wish
we got a Lincoln speaking out against
the war in Afghanistan for one thing we
just can't afford these wars and in my
web were 14 trillion dollars in debt
right now and a major part of that is
from the war in Iraq and the subsequent
war in Afghanistan so even on the dollar
and cents stand when we got to be a
little more careful before we order
American forces into these conflicted
parts of the world like the metal leaf I
think Genghis Khan was the first one to
invade Afghanistan but he was followed
by the British and then more recently by
the Russians the Russians that put a
hundred thousand cracks roots in there
25 thousands then were killed dead on
the battlefield more than that number
crippled or injured the russian treasury
was Jane its range of a breaking point
and after 11 years they fund they limped
out of there defeated and I fear that
possible future for all of us so if I
were in the Senate I'd be raising lots
of questions about why we are in Afghan
stand one question I'd like to how do we
know when we went in front afraid
but what if we got at the end of the end
of the war so those are things that I
think a lot about and that is one of the
reasons I admire Rankin I don't I don't
know all the details of the war and
Mexico and not a specialist done that
but I admire his courage I'm a history
major and I took history Vietnam class
over the summer and of course your name
was talked about a lot because it's a
vietnam-era and I was kind of
disappointing cuz I got a 90 s % of the
class but it's all by men I'm really
hard for that is the Vietnam era and I
was wondering if you at once if you
would one in 1976 yes and what would you
have done as pres money we always hear
about the campaign stuff but you know so
many years down the line I mean looking
back now knowing what you know now and
everything what would you have done as
Alexis in the bar trivia problems Russia
the economy everything like that
well thank you thinking about all those
headaches is one reason I'm probably
glad I didn't win but but to be more
serious about it this is what I would
like to think I would have done that's
what I had in my mind some years ago
Gorbachev the Soviet leader met with
mrs. Thatcher in England and she was
very impressed with him and she called
her friend President Reagan and said
this is a guy we ought to talk to he was
a serious man and to his credit
President Reagan agreed to do that also
to his credit when Gorbachev proposed
that the time had come to end the Cold
War to stop the arms race and to
negotiate lower levels of military
spending President Reagan agree and I
think that's one of the most important
things he did because for all practical
purposes that meeting between President
Reagan and President Gorbachev ended the
Cold War and so the day we don't we
don't really worry today about the
Soviets may be clobbering us with a
nuclear attack the Cold War's largely
over to his credit President Nixon
opened the door to Communist China I
think that was the greatest achievement
of his years in office today nobody
thinks China going to attack the United
States they may worry a little bit about
Chinese merchandiser crowding out ours
but
we get along reasonably well with China
and with Russia and you have to give
credit to President Reagan and the
President Nixon that we no longer have
the sign of Soviet bloc we no longer go
to bed at night wondering if we might be
eliminated during the V&A I would have
pressed on that front very hard I would
have tried to get to know the Soviet
leaders and the Chinese leaders and I
would have pressed for even larger
reductions mutual reductions on both
sides in the arms and a race that's been
going on ever since the Second World War
I want to be clear on this I I believed
in an adequate national defense I was a
bomber pilot in World War two and after
I signed up for pilot training there was
a year passed before they could take me
because they didn't have any planes they
didn't have any instructors I don't want
us to see if get into that situation
again but neither do I want to see what
President Eisenhower warned us against
the mounting power of the military
industrial complex take over the federal
budget
[Applause]
[Music]
and
you know if I can digress here a little
bit from Abraham Lincoln today as we
meet here tonight we have a military
budget of five I'm sorry 650 billion
dollars two-thirds of a trillion you
know how much money that is it's more
than all the other countries in the
world spend on military activities or
military equipment we got a hundred and
eighty five countries in the world at
last count and a hundred and eighty-four
them spend on military purposes less
than the one country the United States
does we have to be strong in a dangerous
world we don't have to waste money on
weapons systems that are now becoming
obsolete I would have tried even as
early as 1972 and I proposed this during
the campaign that we undertake carefully
developed reductions in military oddlies
and divert the savings into other
sources of national strength health care
education
[Applause]
charm so those are that's one of the big
changes i would have I would have tried
to put into effect you know there's a
lot of good ideas I'd like to see
implemented what other people would like
to see implemented but when you spend as
much money as we do on the military it
really tightens up on what you can do in
other areas I think we need a new
definition the National Defense under
which the quality of our education and
the quality of our healthcare the the
cleanliness of our environment those
things would also be included as natural
defenses
ok we'll we'll take one more question
and then we're going to start selling
books here as well so i have to tell you
because there's so many people here we'd
better just take time to autograph which
I can't write in all the wonderful
things you've done in public life so if
you'll be satisfied just for the george
mcgovern will start that in a few
minutes here thank you so much give it
here is that one more question question
1 one old and one there's a very short
with respect to water gauges anything
that you always want to bring up I've
never had a chance to publicise or bring
out yeah would you repeat your question
is there anything about Watergate if you
always wanted to bring out it ever
became public or public enough water
tasted you'd like to point out that oh
not yes the question was is there
anything about Watergate that I would
like to bring out that hasn't yet been
brought out no I don't think so
I I I thought they did a pretty good job
that's the investigating the Watergate
well thanks ever so much and Georgia
life-sign Thank You senator McGovern
senator McGovern will be signing books
back there please sign up for our email
list if you haven't already we'll have
some wonderful events in the fall thank
you very much for coming to the Richard
Nixon Presidential Library Museum good
night this book is part of times books
American president series for more
information visit American president
series.com Joe